census-table-metadata
=====================

Tools for generating metadata about tables and fields in a Census release
based on sequence lookup and table shell files.

### process_sequences.py ###

Processes sequence lookup files from the Census FTP site, in either csv or xls
format. To run, fetch `Sequence_Number_and_Table_Number_Lookup.xls` for the
release you want, e.g. [ftp://ftp2.census.gov/acs2011_1yr/summaryfile/](ftp://ftp2.census.gov/acs2011_1yr/summaryfile/).
(Or you could fetch the .txt version of the file and save as a .csv.)

Then run this script with two arguments:

- The -s flag gets a code for the data release. This can be whatever you like.
It's there to help you remember where the data came from, and potentially
support csv files that combine information from multiple releases.
- The -f flag gets the filepath to the `Sequence_Number` file you downloaded.

`>> python process_sequences.py -s ACS2011_1-Year -f sequence_files/file.xls`

This will create a `Table_Names_and_Subject_Areas` csv , with table names,
table IDs, table size (number of columns) and subject areas.


### process_shells.py ###

Processes table shell files in xls format from the Census FTP site.
To run, first download the proper Census release sequence file, and run
`process_sequences.py` against it. Next, fetch a `TableShells.xls` file from
the same Census release, e.g. [ftp://ftp2.census.gov/acs2011_1yr/summaryfile/](ftp://ftp2.census.gov/acs2011_1yr/summaryfile/).

Then run this script with two arguments.

- The -f flag gets the filepath to the `TableShells` file you downloaded.
- The -m flag gets the filepath to the csv generated by `process_sequences`.
This csv will contain subject_area and other data to merge here, based on
the `Table ID` value.

`>> python process_shells.py -f shell_files/file.xls -m sequence_files/file.xls`

This will create a `Metadata` csv, merging information about tables and columns
with data from the previous output of `process_sequences.py`. This provides
complete metadata for every column of every table, including information about
parent/child relationships with other columns.


### taxonify.py ###

Processes the `Table_Names_and_Subject_Areas` files generated earlier by
`process_sequences`. It creates a new csv that adds custom taxonomy fields,
the mapping for which is controlled by two dicts: `SUBJECT_AREA_TO_TOPICS`
and `TABLE_NAME_TEXT_TO_TOPICS`.

Use the -f arg to pass the filepath to a `Table_Names_and_Subject_Areas` file.

`>> python taxonify.py -f generated_csv/file.csv`

After running, you may want to look through the rows and edit as necessary.
You can also use the -t arg to filter for tables within a topical area.

`>> python taxonify.py -f generated_csv/file.csv -t poverty`
`>> python taxonify.py -f generated_csv/file.csv -t "health insurance"`

This will generate a separate csv with only the tables that match the topic
you're interested in. The Census `subject_area` field is a good starting point
for getting a handle on the data available on specific subjects, but tables
often touch on multiple themes, so this can be a useful exploratory tool.